Recusancy 

in Elizabethan and Jacobean England 

 

With the ascension of Elizabeth I to the throne of England and 
Wales, a series of laws were enacted—collectively known as the 
“Penal Laws”—that criminalized 
the practice of the Catholic faith. 

 

Broadly similar to the Nurem-
berg laws, the Penal Laws at first 
made weekly attendance at 
Church of England services 
mandatory, with fines associated 
for failure to do so. Those who 
were guilty of non-attendance 
were labeled “Popish Recu-
sants”—from the Latin recusare, 
to refuse. 

 

In succession, ever more restric-
tive laws were passed that prohibited the publication of Catholic 
literature, forbade attendance at a Catholic school, made the har-
boring of Catholic clergy a crime, prohibited Catholics from en-
tering the professions and being able to serve in Parliament, and 
made simply being a Jesuit in England a crime of high treason. 
Rewards were offered for those who would inform on their neigh-
bors. 

 

Ownership or publication of the very books presented in this ex-
hibit was strictly forbidden during the period of recusancy. In a 
sense, then, the pages on display here are evidence of a crime. 
They tell tales of an heroic underground culture that survived and 
flourished under the most trying of circumstances, and of individ-
uals caught between their loyalty to their country and their love of 
their faith. 

 
Elizabeth I by George Gower, ca. 1588. 



English Catholic Colleges Abroad 

 

During the recusancy period, 
English Catholicism in exile 
found a home in a number of so-called English colleges on the 
continent. These colleges were 
centers of theological study, 
publication, and missionary 
work for those English Catho-
lics who refused the acts of uni-
formity and were thus subject to 
a series of harsh penalties at 
home. 

 
William Allen, seeking to create 
a seminary capable of training 
an English Catholic clergy in 
waiting, founded the English College at Douay in France in 1568. 
As time went on, the college shifted focus to the clandestine mis-
sionary work it was carrying out in England itself, where Catholic 
proselytization was considered treasonous and was punishable by 
death. During the 16th and 17th centuries, over 150 Catholic mis-
sionaries from Douay were executed in England. 

 
In 1593, Robert Parsons, a prominent Jesuit theologian and writer, 
founded the College at Saint Omer (also in France). Because Cath-
olic education in England had essentially been outlawed, Parsons 
sought to establish an English college that, unlike its peers in 
Douay, Rome, and Valladolid, would focus on educating the laity. 

 
Both colleges had active presses, producing primarily Catholic Bi-
bles, controversialist tracts, and theological treatises. This exhibit 
features several editions from each press. 


Colleges of Douai, by Adrien de Montigny , 1603. 



Reginald Pole, 1500-1558 

Reginald Cardinal Pole was a 
crucial player in the complex 
political drama that led to the 
creation of the Anglican 
Church. A grand-nephew of 
both Edward IV and Richard 
III, he was also a second cousin 
and close friend of Henry VIII. 
However, as a devout Catholic 
and a personal friend of the 
Pope, Pole eventually found 
himself in a difficult position: 
support the King -- his cousin, 
benefactor, and friend -- or re-
main faithful to the Catholic Church. 

 
Pole chose the Catholic Church, and as his renown as a theolo-
gian and papal diplomat grew, so too did the complexity of his 
relationship with Henry. While he initially sought to remove 
himself from the coming Anglican/Catholic schism, Pole’s 
break from the King grew increasingly public. Against his own 
protestations, the Pope made him a Cardinal. Two years later, 
Pole was declared a traitor after orchestrating an embargo of 
England in response to Henry’s defiance of the Church. While 
Pole was abroad in 1539, his mother and brothers were arrest-
ed, charged with supporting his treason, and executed. 

 
Queen Mary would eventually restore Pole to a position of 
prominence as Archbishop of Canterbury. He was the last 
Catholic to hold that post and was consecrated the day after 
the previous Archbishop, Thomas Cranmer, an Anglican, was 
burned at the stake for heresy. 



The Controversialists 

In the literary world, a “controversialist” is a provoca-
teur who advocates for or against a cause. During the 
recusancy, controversialists were active on both sides 
of the Anglican/Catholic schism, with each work 
spawning inevitable retorts that frequently stretched 
on for years. Controversial works typically took the 
form of detailed, highly structured refutations based 
on historical and theological grounds. In addition, 
these texts were often rife with florid and inflammato-
ry insults directed at competing authors and clergy-
men. 

 
Due to the hyperbolic tenor of 
their language, many of these 
works may appear whimsical 
and amusing to the modern 
reader. However, the literary 
feuds in which recusant contro-
versialists engaged had poten-
tially dire repercussions. Eng-
lish Catholics had to either 
print their books clandestinely 
or abroad for fear of severe penalties, which ranged 
from fines through incarceration or even, in some cas-
es, execution. For this reason, recusant works in gen-
eral were often written pseudonymously or published 
under false imprints that bore the names of fictional 
places and non-existent firms. 

 




