Recusancy 

in Elizabethan and Jacobean England 

 

With the accession of Elizabeth 
I to the throne of England and 
Wales, a series of laws were en-
acted—collectively known as the 
“Penal Laws”—that criminalized 
the practice of the Catholic 
faith. 

 

Broadly similar to the Nurem-
berg laws, the Penal Laws at first 
made weekly attendance at 
Church of England services 
mandatory, with fines associated 
for failure to do so. Those who 
were guilty of non-attendance 
were labeled “Popish Recusants”—from the Latin recusare, to re-
fuse. 

 

In succession, ever more restrictive laws were passed that pro-
hibited the publication of Catholic literature, forbade attend-
ance at a Catholic school, made the harboring of Catholic clergy 
a crime, prohibited Catholics from entering the professions and 
being able to serve in Parliament, and made simply being a Jesu-
it in England a crime of high treason. Rewards were offered for 
those who would inform on their neighbors. 

 

Ownership or publication of the very books presented in this 
exhibit was strictly forbidden during the period of recusancy. In 
a sense, then, the pages on display here are evidence of a crime. 
They tell tales of an heroic underground culture that survived 
and flourished under the most trying of circumstances, and of 
individuals caught between their loyalty to their country and 
their love of their faith. 

 
Elizabeth I by George Gower, ca. 1588. 



English Catholic Colleges Abroad 

 

During the recusancy period, 
English Catholicism in exile 
had found a home in a num-
ber of so-called English col-
leges on the continent. All of 
the books on display in this 
exhibit case were printed at a 
handful of these locations 
during the 16th and 17th cen-
turies. Primarily in France and 
Italy, the English colleges were 
centers of theological study, 
publication, and missionary 
work for those Catholics exiles 
who refused the acts of uniformity and were thus subject 
to a series of harsh penalties at home. 

 
William Allen, seeking to create a seminary capable of 
training an English Catholic clergy in waiting, founded the 
English College at Douay in France in 1568. As time went 
on, the college shifted focus to the clandestine missionary 
work it was carrying out in England itself, where Catholic 
proselytization was considered treasonous and was punisha-
ble by death. During the 16th and 17th centuries, over 150 
Catholic missionaries from Douay were executed in Eng-
land. 

 
In 1593, Robert Parsons, a prominent Jesuit theologian and 
writer, founded the College at Saint Omer (also in France). 
Because Catholic education in England had essentially been 
outlawed, Parsons sought to establish an English college 
that, unlike its peers in Douay, Rome, and Valladolid, would 
focus on educating the laity. 


Colleges of Douai, by Adrien de Montigny , 1603. 



Reginald Pole, 1500-1558 

 

Reginald Cardinal Pole (1500-
1558) was a crucial player in the 
complex political drama that 
led to the creation of the An-
glican Church. A grand-nephew 
of both Edward IV and Rich-
ard III, he was also a second 
cousin and close friend of 
Henry VIII. However, as a de-
vout Catholic and a personal 
friend of the Pope, Pole even-
tually found himself in a diffi-
cult position: support the King -- his cousin, benefactor, 
and friend -- or remain faithful to the Catholic Church. 

 
Pole chose the Catholic Church, and as his renown as a 
theologian and papal diplomat grew, so too did the com-
plexity of his relationship with Henry. While he initially 
sought to remove himself from the coming Anglican/
Catholic schism, Pole’s break from the King grew increas-
ingly public. Against his own protestations, the Pope 
made him a Cardinal. Two years later, Pole was declared a 
traitor after orchestrating an embargo of England in re-
sponse to Henry’s defiance of the Church. While Pole was 
abroad in 1539, his mother and brothers were arrested, 
charged with supporting his treason, and executed. 

 
Queen Mary would eventually restore Pole to a position 
of prominence as Archbishop of Canterbury. He was the 
last Catholic to hold that post and was consecrated the 
day after the previous Archbishop, Thomas Cranmer, an 
Anglican, was burned at the stake for heresy. 



The Controversialists 

 

The books on display in this ex-
hibit case are “controversialist” 
works. In the literary world, a 
controversialist is a provocateur 
who advocates for or against a 
cause. During the recusancy, 
controversialists were active on 
both sides of the Anglican/
Catholic schism, with each work 
spawning inevitable retorts that 
frequently stretched on for 
years. The controversial litera-
ture of this period frequently took the form of detailed, 
highly structured refutation based on historical and theo-
logical grounds. In addition, these texts were often rife 
with florid and inflammatory insults directed at competing 
authors and clergymen. 

 
Due to the hyperbolic tenor of their language, many of 
these works appear whimsical and even amusing to the 
modern reader. However, the literary feuds in which recu-
sant controversialists engaged had potentially dire reper-
cussions. English Catholics had to either print their books 
clandestinely or abroad for fear of severe penalties, which 
ranged from fines through incarceration or even, in some 
cases, execution. For this reason, recusant works in general 
were often written pseudonymously or published under 
false imprints that bore the names of fictional places and 
non-existent firms. 

 




 Robert Parsons, S.J., 1546-1610 

 
Like his contemporary William Allen and Reginald Pole before 
him, Robert Parsons was an English Catholic clergyman of con-
siderable influence both at home and abroad. He was a contro-
versial figure in literature, politics, and within the Church itself. 

 

Parsons was a theologian and facul-
ty member at Oxford who took the 
oath of supremacy on multiple oc-
casions, but resigned his post 
amidst a series of unclear circum-
stances in 1574. Shortly after, he 
moved to the continent where he 
joined the Catholic Church. Several 
years later, Parsons was sent from 
the College at Rome to work as a 
missionary, and accompanied Saint 
Edmund Campion to England in 
1580. Operating clandestinely, he 
set up a number of “magical” 
printing presses capable of publishing replies on short notice to 
the Protestant literature of the day. A man of letters, Parsons 
was a rabid controversialist who authored numerous works of 
Catholic apology and Protestant scandalization. After Campion 
was arrested, tortured, and executed, and the presses seized, 
Parsons again fled to Europe. There he helped to further devel-
op the network of English colleges in France, serving as rector 
in Rome and eventually founding the College at St. Omer. 

 

Along with Cardinal Allen, Parsons used his position of promi-
nence within the Church to advocate for and even help plan the 
ill-fated invasion of the Spanish Armada. After its failure, he 
continued to urge Spain, a Catholic stronghold, to invade Eng-
land and restore papal supremacy. 



